.TH evolution-translate-setup 1 "November 2025" "evolution-translate-extension" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
evolution-translate-setup \- set up a per-user Python environment for Evolution Translate
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B evolution-translate-setup
[
.B --models
|
.B --no-models
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B evolution-translate-setup
creates a per-user Python virtual environment used by the Evolution Translate extension.
It installs the required Python packages and can optionally download default Argos Translate models.

By default, the virtual environment is created under
.I $HOME/.local/lib/evolution-translate/venv
and is auto-detected by the extension.

This command does not require root and is intended to be run by each user who wants to use the extension.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --models
Install a default set of Argos Translate models after creating/updating the virtual environment.
.TP
.B --no-models
Do not install Argos Translate models.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TRANSLATE_PYTHON_BIN
Path to a Python interpreter to use for running the translation backend. If unset, the tool and extension
auto-detect the per-user virtual environment at
.I $HOME/.local/lib/evolution-translate/venv/bin/python.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $HOME/.local/lib/evolution-translate/venv
Default per-user virtual environment location used by the extension.
.TP
.I /usr/share/evolution-translate/translate/
Helper scripts used for model installation and maintenance.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Create the virtual environment and interactively choose whether to install models:
.br
.B evolution-translate-setup
.TP
Create the virtual environment and install default models non-interactively:
.br
.B evolution-translate-setup --models
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR evolution (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrea Costantino <andreaivancostantino@outlook.it>
